This repository is the appendix item of master's thesis
Abstract
The key to operational dispatch command for general speed railways is to utilize all transportation equipment fully and efficiently on the railway network, organize train operations on the network in an economical and reasonable manner, and complete all transportation tasks of China Railway on time and with high quality. The train operation situation of general speed railway involves the perception, understanding, and integration of various elements of train operation. Evaluating the train operation situation of general speed railway can help dispatchers efficiently manage railway resources on the network and complete transportation tasks with high quality. Therefore, studying the train operation situation of general speed railway is crucial for achieving intelligent dispatch assistance and control, as well as making intelligent dispatch decisions. This article investigates the representation and evaluation issues of the train operation situation of general speed railway, with the main work as follows:
（1）Combining with existing research on railway operation, the train operation situation of general speed railway is defined and the connotation of situation representation is explained. Based on existing literature and the definition of the train operation situation of general speed railway, this article proposes two methods for constructing a representation system for e train operation situation of general speed railway. The first method starts with the specific work of train operation, analyzes the organization of passenger and freight train operation, analyzes, and extracts the key influencing factors, and refines and constructs the indicators for train operation representation from the key influencing factors in combination with the relevant technical and economic indicators of general speed railway train operation. The second method analyzes the information elements that dispatchers can perceive when performing various tasks and uses these elements as an important basis for the train operation situation representation system. Through these two extraction methods of situation representation system, the train operation situation representation of general speed railway is divided into five main components: network capacity utilization, facilities and equipment utilization, car flow organization, demarcation points, and train delay.
（2）Combining with relevant literature, the practical work organization of general speed railway train operation in China, and the opinions of front-line dispatchers, a further construction of the representation system for train operation situation is conducted, and the quantitative representation indicators are developed. By concretizing the constitutive elements, 15 train operation situation representation indicators are selected and a quantitative system of representation indicators for the train operation situation of general speed railway is established. Subsequently, a combination weighting method of order relationship analysis and entropy weighting method is used to improve dynamic comprehensive evaluation model of double incentives in combination with the actual situation of railway train operation in China, and an evaluation model for the train operation situation of general speed railway and its sub-representation evaluation models are constructed.
（3）Based on the actual transportation data of a dispatching area in China in December 2022, an example analysis was conducted to evaluate the train operation situation of general speed railway in 20 time periods. The evaluation results of the train operation situation and its sub-representations were obtained for each time and ranked, and the results were analyzed using data visualization methods. Finally, the sensitivity and effectiveness of the evaluation method were verified by comparing it with the traditional entropy weight evaluation method.
key words： general speed railway； train operation； situation assessment; dynamic assessment; data visualization
